Hello, my name is Mark Griffith, and this
is a short introduction into how to invest
in precious metals. Perhaps the first thing
you need to do is be aware of what the precious
metals are and how not to confuse them with
some other metals which can also be expensive,
usually known as the strategic metals or the
strategic minerals. Precious metals tend to
be metals that have been used in jewelry at
one time or other, like platinum, gold, silver
and some others you might not have heard of
like palladium, rhodium, ruthenium. Strategic
metals tend to be things like tungsten, cobalt,
malibdinum, for example titanium and these
are often used because they have very, very
strong structural qualities. They can be used
to make steel very hard, for cutting things
in industry. They can be used to make very,
very light pieces of aircraft for example.
So you got to distinguish the precious metals
and the strategic metals. Among the precious
metals, you will find that although they are
used for jewelry, they also have industrial
uses. Silver is still used in photography.
Gold is used in electronics. Platinum or palladium
are used in catalyzers that make car exhaust
clean and safe. So the precious metals are
sometimes used for jewelry. They are sometimes
used for industrial reasons, and they're sometimes
used simply as bullion. In gobs which - of
metal which are regarded as valuable in themselves
to store value. And you'll find slabs of these
in the vaults of most major banks. And as
with just trading in gold, essentially you
want to decide, do you want to hold the metal
and if you want to hold the metal is this
going to be a nuisance. If you have some bars
of platinum round at your house, even if they're
in a safe, you might attract the attention
of burglars. If you don't want to be burgled,
it might be good to keep it in a bank, but
if you keep it in a bank you might have to
pay them a little bit of rent to look after
it for you. So you can either hold the metal,
or you can hold the paper instrument which
gives you the right to the metal or which
tracks the price of the metal. Or as I said
before you can try to invest in mining companies,
whose value usually goes up and down in line
with those metals. Be aware that there's a
different problem with each precious metal.
Silver is the most traded so large volumes
of silver are traded each year, the movements
can be very fast, and it can also mean that
you don't always understand why the price
is moving the way it's moving. There's a similar
problem with gold which is heavily used as
a bullion metal, as a reserve metal by major
banks. Quite often, of trying to do several
things in the markets, they might try to reverse
a price move by gold, so gold is moving up,
because everyone feels unhappy about the dollar.
The central banks at this point may be dumping
gold to raise money for their own purposes
and also to manipulate the price of gold back
down again. So if you deal in gold and silver,
you have healthy volumes, you can easily get
in and out of the market, but the prices can
move in unexpected ways. If you deal in rarer
metals like platinum, palladium, rhodium,
ruthenium, you have the opposite problem.
The volumes are very thin meaning there's
not much trading on any particular day, which
means that you can find it difficult to get
out of the market or into the market at the
price you want to. If the volumes are thin,
you can find yourself in a position where
you're the only seller, and there's nobody
ready to buy off of you. So there are dangers
with being in markets which have very, very
large volumes, and there are dangers with
being in markets with small volumes. Your
advantage with things like platinum, palladium,
rhodium, ruthenium is they're generally not
used as bullion metals, so you're not actually
setting yourself up against the major banks,
they're not trying as hard to control those
prices. So you have an advantage there. As
ever, be careful and decide what it is you
want to do, decide how much risk you want
to take on and decide how much you can afford
to lose and good luck.